---
layout: post
title: Mnemoji
image: /public/images/mnemoji.jpg
summary: >
    It's been a long time since I've built anything really interesting. Mnemoji represents the end of down cycle in side project productivity, and is the coming together of an idea that I've had for a really long time. I'm pretty excited about it, and I hope you will be, too.
---

It has been a long time since I've built anything substantial (outside of work, obviously). There are several reasons for this:

1. **I've been busy.** The last two years have seen hundreds of hours of business travel, two moves (one across the Pacific), the purchase of a house, and of course countless hours spent with my family.
2. **I've been feeling burned out.** I'd worked on a lot of things between [2009](/2014/10/23/the-one-where-my-company-failed/) and 2012, and I needed a break to focus on a few very important things (work, family) without constantly feeling like I needed to spend my spare time doing something else.
3. **I've been running low on ideas.** Probably related to the first, but I've honestly not felt like I've had a deep well of decent ideas from which to draw inspiration.

To be totally honest, I've enjoyed this downtime. It has allowed me to focus and refresh, and make  real progress toward several important personal goals. But lately I've gotten the itch again, and I've started building.

### What is Mnemoji?

Simply, Mnemoji is a mobile web flashcard application, built for people who need to remember a large number of facts for use in their daily life (a surprisingly large number of people, actually, despite the bad reputation rote learning has earned over the last century or so). It's simple and straightforward, and hides much of the complexity of a configurable spaced repetition system behind sane defaults that will be good enough for most people, while at the same time providing power (eventually) equivalent to solutions like [Anki](http://ankisrs.net/) (I love Anki, but in the last several years its interface has jumped the shark in terms of complexity and unintuitiveness into Supermemo territory).

### Why this?

I have a long, long history with spaced repetition, starting with flashcards to learn Chinese in the mid-2000s. I've gone back and forth on their effectiveness, but am currently (and have been for a while) at a place where I see them as an important tool in one's learning toolbox. They don't solve every problem that a learner has -- you still need practice actually doing *the thing* that you're learning, and there are plenty of types of knowledge that aren't well-suited for consumption via flashcards ([procedural knowledge](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procedural_knowledge) can be a challnge to represent well), but there is a surprising amount of knowledge that *is* well-suited for consumption (and later utilization) via memorization, and spaced repetition is far and away the best way to memorize something.

### What is spaced repetition?

For an excellent rundown on what spaced repetition is, I normally point people to this six year old (!!) [profile of the creator of Supermemo](http://archive.wired.com/medtech/health/magazine/16-05/ff_wozniak?currentPage=all), Piotr Wozniak, in Wired. I'll write something of my own some day soon, but I haven't yet.

### When can I use Mnemoji?

Soon. I'll be opening it up to a private beta in the next couple of weeks. If you're interested, [sign up for my weekly newsletter](http://eepurl.com/6Jawn) (either by following the link I just gave you or using the form at the bottom of this post) as I'll be using it to send invites for folks to try it out.

### Will Mnemoji be free?

No, it won't be, but it won't be expensive either. I'm targeting ~$5/month, which is enough to cover operational costs without worrying about restrictive usage caps. I personally wouldn't trust my learning data to a service that doesn't make enough money to cover its bills, and I don't think advertising is a decent model for the sort of service that I'm building.
